[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the Southern
Sahara, in Niger,
the rocks contain one of
the world's most spectacular
and amazing examples
of primitive rock art,
a large and a small
giraffe, side by side.
Although they are
nearly life-sized,
they are carved
in minute detail.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SHEEP BLEATING]
>> This region is occupied
by nomadic herdsmen.
They have lived on these
plains for thousands of years.
Over years of roaming
around these Dabous rocks,
they have left behind a
huge number of carvings.
Over 800 have been counted.
Over 700 of which
represent animals.
Some show cattle,
but there are also
carvings of some of the wild
beasts that once lived here--
ostriches, gazelles, giraffes.
>> The large giraffe at Dabous
has one particularly striking
detail--
it seems to be tethered
by a length of rope
attached to its snout.
The graven line reaches
to the animal's hooves
and is reminiscent of a lead.
The same detail is visible
on the smaller giraffe.
If we assume these
lines to represent
a tether or an
accessory allowing a man
to control the
animal, this implies
that at one time giraffes
may have been domesticated,
which seems unlikely.
>> Most rock art experts have
a different interpretation.
The tether is a symbolic one.
In this picture, man is linked
to a beast which he admires.
It can be a simple
artist's tribute, but also
a work with magical,
even mystical, qualities.
The size and detail of the
carvings are in any case
an appropriate representation
of the importance
of the giraffe in man's psyche.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One has to imagine
how, in the dawn of time,
man would have felt
before these animals,
which dwarfed him
in size and power.
His initial feeling
was probably that they
had greater powers than him.
Above all, animals
are a mystery to man.
All over the world, this
is the principal theme
in primitive rock art,
the place that animals
have in the minds of men.
The art shows the game
they wish to hunt,
but also these
mysterious beings they
would meet in the forests that
made such an impression on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> These are rock carvings left
by Indians on Vancouver Island,
off Canada's Pacific coast.
They are several
thousand years old.
The images of cats,
wolves, birds of prey,
enhance the attribute or
behavior which most impressed
men about these beasts--
the wolf's predatory posture,
the eagle's carnassial beak.
>> We see the eagle again here
on these wooden totem poles
around which the tribes
used to congregate.
The eyes and the beak
are hugely exaggerated.
When a beast was
represented on a totem pole,
it became sacred to the tribe.
It was forbidden to kill
it or eat its flesh.
The totemized
animal thus becomes
the first sacred animal.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHANTING]
When a tribe chose
its totem creature,
it was because it recognized
itself in that creature.
And the animal became
the incarnation
of the tribe's characteristics.
On these totem poles
in Vancouver's Museum
of Anthropology, it's difficult
to distinguish man from beast.
It has become hard to tell
who has taken characteristics
from whom.
The totem creature becomes
the tribe's forefather,
its ancestor.
It is most commonly
a powerful animal
to which they
associated themselves
by the wearing of masks
during their ceremonies.
>> The representation of animals
as sacred by means of totem
poles is common to a
great many civilizations.
These masks at the Manega
Museum in Burkina Faso
show us some of the animals
which would have been
sacred in African societies.
The origins of these strong
links between man and beast
are often linked to the
oral history of a people.
>> Several dozen crocodiles
live in this pond in Bazoule
in the heart of Burkina Faso.
Despite the presence
of the crocodiles,
the young men of the village
come here to fish every day.
Engrossed in their
work, which involves
catching the fish in a
hoop, the young fishermen
pay little attention
to the crocodiles.
They are just a part
of everyday life.
[CROCODILES GROWLING]
>> Some of these Nile crocodiles
can grow to almost four meters
long, and can easily carry
off one of the wild beast that
cross the pond twice a day.
Despite the potential danger
to children and livestock,
no one thinks of
getting rid of them.
They have the rather enviable
status of sacred creatures.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
All of this is linked
to a story the Mossi
community has passed down from
one generation to the next.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> The village of Bazoule was
founded several centuries ago
by a certain Naba Kouba who was
reputedly a fearsome warrior.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
In the twilight of his life, he
vowed he would be reincarnated.
And he chose a creature in
which he recognized himself--
a crocodile, a powerful
and terrifying beast.
No one knows which
crocodile holds Naba Kouba's
reincarnated spirit.
And so all crocodiles
are venerated.
>> As is often the case, the
original spiritual tradition
has grown into a
local superstition.
In a place where
water is so precious,
it's believed that
crocodiles must be protected.
For while they remain, the
pond will never dry up.
The birth of any
new baby crocodile
is seen as a sign, a
blessing, a good omen
for the prosperity
of the village.
This man is responsible for
maintaining good relations
with the sacred crocodiles
by offering them gifts.
>> These incredible scenes
are an echo of something that
happened several
thousand years before.
In ancient Egypt,
when travelers would
make a detour via
the city of Shedet,
also known as Crocodilopolis,
to witness the feeding
of the sacred crocodile.
Only one crocodile was
chosen to be the sacred one.
But its status was exceptional.
It was even said to have
worn golden bracelets
on its forelegs.
>> It was an animal which
occupied a very special place
in Egyptian civilization.
It is omnipresent throughout
religions and cults
over 5,000 years.
But its role within
those religions and cults
will evolve a great deal
over the changing dynasties.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In primitive times the
Egyptians, like many others,
worshipped animals
as actual gods.
These beliefs were often
specific to provinces,
or nomes, and the
entire province
would worship the same animal.
It was a form of totemism.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As human society
gradually developed,
man's dominance over beast
became a reality to all.
And deities started to take
on human form, while still
keeping the heads of the
animal gods of previous times.
[CHANTING]
Anubis, the god
of the underworld,
is represented with
the head of a jackal.
[CHANTING]
>> Most animal species are
represented in Egypt's crowded
pantheon of gods, with the
notable exception of the horse.
If it has pride of place
on this mural at Karnak,
it is merely as a
literal representation--
harness to the war
chariot of Ramses II
at the Battle of Kadesh.
However, on the bas relief, one
can see a lion-headed deity.
This is Sekhmet,
the goddess of war.
>> In later times, though gods
became routinely represented
in human form, animal imagery
did not disappear completely.
But the role of animals changed.
They became companions to
the gods, their familiars.
They took on a symbolic role.
Like these baboons at the
foot of the Obelisk at Luxor
and at the Temple
at Karnak, where
they are depicted in
a sun-worshiping pose.
>> The baboon appears as a
manifestation of the God Thoth,
god of science and writing.
But the ape is not
a god in itself--
merely an image of a
god, a kind of learning
aid which helped people to
understand the abstract concept
of divinity.
>> In ancient Egypt, there was
a remarkable difference between
the religious practices of
the pharaoh's court and that
of the populace.
Between the complexities of
the pantheon, which the priests
explained, and peasant beliefs.
For instance, the cat
was for a long time
absent from the
official religion.
The peasants referred to cats
as the lions of the poor.
They were appreciated
as household pets,
as they got rid of
rats and snakes.
The cat eventually became the
subject of a popular cult.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was here at Tell Basta
in the Nile Delta that the cult
really began 1,000 years before
the birth of Jesus Christ.
It reached its peak
eight centuries later.
The town was then
known as Bubastis.
It was under the patronage
of the Goddess Bastet.
Bastet was the goddess
of the sun and fertility.
She was represented as a
woman with the head of a cat.
At Bubastis, cats were seen
as the earthly manifestation
of the goddess, and so
were considered sacred.
>> The Temple of Bastet once
stood at the site of these
ruins.
There was also a big
cemetery where cats were
buried after being mummified.
The city was pillaged
and very little
remains of its treasures.
All of the cat mummies
were stolen or destroyed,
but others have
been found elsewhere
because cat worship eventually
spread to the whole of Egypt.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Studies of some of these
mummies reveal that some
of these cats were very young,
which implies that they did not
die a natural death.
X-rays confirm this hypothesis.
This cat clearly has
fractured vertebrae,
clearly the cause of death.
>> It seems shocking that
cats, which were worshipped,
were also the
victims of sacrifice.
There are two theories.
One is that the cat population
got so out of control
that a form of
euthanasia was performed
to keep their numbers down.
But a more cynical explanation
is that temple officials
practiced the breeding and
slaughter of cats in order
to make mummies,
which they then sold
to pilgrims, who in their
turn used them as offerings
to the cat goddess.
>> All sorts of other
animals were mummified--
dogs, fish, shrews, gazelles.
Hundreds of thousands of
animals in ancient Egypt
were victims of this tragic
yet prestigious treatment.
These baboon corpses are among
the most moving and spectacular
examples.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Some of these apes died of
old age in their master's homes
or in the temples.
But the majority
were sacrificed.
In Hermopolis in the
underground animal necropolises,
archaeologists have discovered
thousands of mummified baboons,
as well as a similar
number of mummified ibises.
The baboon and the
Ibis, both creatures
closely linked to the
God of Hermopolis, Thoth.
>> While the Egyptian pantheon
of gods became over millennia
extremely complex, it was
actually founded on the most
basic principles of observation.
[SHEEP BLEATING]
The ibis was
associated with the god
of writing because
of the precision
and finesse of its beak,
reminiscent of the styli used
to trace hieroglyphics
on parchment.
And because of the current
shape of this beak resembling
a crescent moon,
Thoth and the ibis
are always inextricably
linked to the moon.
>> And because it can fly,
the bird can reach the gods up
above, and so naturally
becomes the messenger.
In Egypt, the Ibis
would forewarn man
of the flooding of the Nile.
In many ancient
civilizations, birds
became the emissaries
of the gods.
In Rome and ancient
Greece, it was
believed that animals
had no free will,
that their every
movement and action
was guided by a divine hand.
Priests would observe
their actions and behavior.
They were convinced
that they were the gods'
way of communicating with them.
>> They would try to interpret
a bird's flight as readily
as the movements of a lizard.
This Roman copy of a
Greek statue by Praxiteles
shows Apollo watching
the animal's behavior,
trying to decipher
the god's message.
[TRIBAL MUSIC PLAYING]
This tradition of
animal divination
endures to this day in several
places around the world.
>> It can be seen in Western
Africa in the north of Cameroon
in the village of Rhumsiki,
where a witch doctor predicts
the future by interpreting
the language of a crab.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The idea is quite simple.
He places the crab in a jar
containing pieces of wood
laid out in a specific pattern.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And he waits for
the crab to move them.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> These men have a firm belief
that the crab at this point
in time has no will of its own
but is guided by the spirits.
To get into the
right frame of mind
to interpret the
crabs movements,
the witch doctor inhaled
some hallucinogenic powder.
>> [CHANTING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> What the crab does, what
the spirits are saying can
sometimes, as in this case,
be subject to contradictory
interpretation.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> This time to eliminate
any possible doubt,
the witch doctor consults
the crab directly,
asking it to whisper the message
from the beyond into his ear.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> If the Rhumsiki villagers
seemed to attach an undue
importance to a seemingly
insignificant creature,
it is because of one of its
particular characteristics--
it buries itself.
When they see it sink
beneath the earth,
they imagine it is
consorting with the gods
of the underworld.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Here is another creature
linked forever to subterranean
powers.
The snake is an
animal like no other,
with a shape reduced
to its most basic form,
but able to crawl, climb, or
swim, at home in any situation.
>> An ambiguous creature which
one never seems to get to grips
with or get to know.
Snakes have always
fascinated man.
In all the world's
mythologies taken as a whole,
it is always certainly
the world's most
venerated creature.
In many civilizations,
the snake was
worshipped as a creating
deity, a great god
of darkness linked to the chaos
of the origins of existence.
>> Many snake deities will
come to take the place of these
primitive gods.
They could be good or
evil, capable of the best
and the worst.
In pre-Colombian societies,
the good side was prevalent.
>> The snake is frequently
represented on Aztec or Mayan
monuments.
It becomes the incarnation
of the civilizing god,
linked to crops and fertility.
It often takes the form
of a winged serpent,
known by the Aztecs as
Quetzalcoatl and by the Mayans
as Kukulkan, represented here
holding a head in its jaws.
>> Snakes are still worshipped
nowadays in Western Africa.
They are the object
of a genuine cult
in Ouidah, in Southern
Benin's Lake region.
Not just any snake, more
specifically-- pythons.
There is a temple dedicated
to them behind these walls.
>> Within the temple's
inner sanctum,
the village's wise men come
to pay tribute and respect
to these sacred pythons,
which they call dangbes.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> This snake worship is
relatively recent here,
dating back to the 18th century.
Two kingdoms were then at war,
the Danxome and the Ouidahs.
As the Ouidahs were
about to admit defeat,
thousands of pythons are said
to have come out of the forest
and put the Danxome to flight.
[TRIBAL SINGING]
>> The king of the Ouidahs
wanted to thank the pythons
and build a temple
dedicated to them.
[TRIBAL SINGING]
>> Ever since, this small
circular building has housed
a few sacred specimens.
[TRIBAL SINGING]
The python's temple
is directly opposite
the Christian cathedral.
Over the road, the snake is not
accorded the same privileges
nor is it seen in such
a benevolent light.
[RELIGIOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the Bible, the
snake represents evil.
The snake tempted
the first woman
into tasting the
forbidden fruit,
so depriving man of
paradise on Earth.
Paradoxically, the snake
is the only creature
to play an active role
in the scriptures.
All the other creatures appear
in merely symbolic roles.
[RELIGIOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
The animals which appear
the most in the Bible
are the ones that men
most often encountered
in their daily lives.
[BELL RINGING]
They are remembered for
the image they convey.
They have a symbolic value.
>> The bee is identified
with hard work,
the dove with innocence,
and the ewe with gentleness.
[SHEEP BLEATING]
And so to help to
convey the message,
the Holy Spirit is shown as a
dove, and the children of God
are represented as
sheep led by a shepherd.
[RELIGIOUS MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Other creatures, however, are
used to convey negative images,
such as sin, temptation.
They become the
incarnation of evil,
like these rats depicted
devouring the world
on the Church of
Saint-Germain-l'Auxerrois in
Paris.
Because the wolf eats
sheep, it automatically
becomes the devil himself,
attacking the Lord's flock.
>> In the 13th century in
the Gubbio region of Italy,
the devil incarnate was a
huge wolf spreading terror
throughout the land.
The story goes that
Saint Francis of Assisi
convinced the wolf
to stop doing wrong
and that the repentant wolf
became as meek as a lamb.
>> Usually, people kept away
from supposedly evil animals
for fear of being
accused of witchcraft.
It was best to stay away
from rams or black cats.
However, the cat was
venerated in the town of Ypres
in Belgium.
When this region
converted to Christianity,
the religious
authorities demanded
that the town proved
it had renounced
the cult of cat worship,
which it had celebrated
at great festivals where
live cats were thrown
from the top of this tower.
>> A practice which lasted
until the 19th century.
Nowadays, the tradition
is held by this jester,
throwing soft toy
cats from the tower.
[CROWDS CHEERING]
Every three years, Ypres
celebrates its cat festival.
It no longer has anything
to do with the sacred.
It has become a purely
pagan and festive occasion.
Throughout the
Christian West, the link
between animals and
religion has faded
to the point where
it only exists
as the echo of a distant memory.
[DRUMS BEATING]
>> In India, however, this
powerful and intimate link
between animals and religious
belief and practice is
as widespread as ever.
The most famous example
being the sacred cow.
[INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
To understand why this creature
has such an exalted status,
one must refer back to ancient
Sanskrit texts, the "Vedas."
The "Vedas" teach that the
being who gives us milk
is our mother.
Since humans drink
cow's milk, Vedic wisdom
tells us that the cow must
be accepted, respected,
and treated as a mother figure.
>> The cow, actually
a water Buffalo,
has been considered sacred in
India since the 5th century BC.
Quite recently,
Mahatma Gandhi said,
any man who does
not believe the cow
is sacred is not a true
Hindu, because the cow is
the embodiment of divine order.
And so cows live a peaceful
and fearless existence
among India's population, who
may drink or otherwise use
their milk.
>> Even their droppings are
seen in a positive light.
Cow pats are collected for
heating fuel or building mud
walls.
[CAR HORN HONKING]
There are nearly 200
million cattle in India,
approximately 15% of the
world's bovine population.
As the killing of a cow
is seen in Hindu society
as a serious offense,
only a few thousand
end up on the butcher's table.
The animals benefit directly
from man's interpretation
of the sacred texts.
>> Here in India, some
religions go even further
in their respect for animals.
This woman is a follower
of the Jain religion.
There are about five
million Jains in India.
The religion predates Hinduism.
It is a religion based on
non-violence and absolute
respect for all forms of life.
>> Unlike Hinduism, Jainism
has no external deity.
Jains believe that god is
within every living being,
and so every life
form is sacred.
This nun who officiates in this
temple must wear a mask over
her face so that she cannot
swallow even the smallest
insect.
Any creature needs merely
the slightest connection
to a god to be treated
with the greatest
respect and protection.
>> This is particularly true of
these macaque monkeys who have
a free run of Indian towns
because they are linked
to Hanuman, the Monkey God,
an important figure in Hindu
mythology.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]
In Varanasi, the monkeys have
overrun the Temple of Durga
to such an extent that it has
become known as the Monkey
Temple, even though the
Goddess Durga is usually
linked to the tiger.
>> Here, the sanctification
of animals never seems to make
sense to the non-believer.
In a country where hygiene
problems are legion,
there are even places where
rats are considered sacred.
[INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
In Deshnok in
Northern Rajasthan,
this temple houses thousands
of rats, fed and protected
by their devotees.
[BELL RINGS]
>> The reason for their status
has its roots in an ancient
folk tale.
A great many years ago,
a yellow fever epidemic
killed all the town's children.
Their desperate parents
pleaded with a local miracle
worker whose name was Karni Mata
to do something-- and she did.
She reincarnated all of
the children as rats.
[INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the local dialect,
the same word, Kabba,
is used for both
children and rats.
Because the rats are seen
as the town's own children,
everybody takes care
of and feeds the rats.
[INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
The priests keep a
close eye on the rats
and look after their well-being.
The inner sanctum of the
temple is home to a true
cult. The faithful worship
both Karni Mata as a goddess
and the rats who harbor the
souls of their children.
[INDIAN MUSIC PLAYING]
>> On the doors of
this temple at Deshnok,
the rat is represented alongside
another important mythological
figure, half man,
half elephant, Ganesh,
one of the most popular deities
in this part of the world.
Ganesh and the rat are
inextricably linked.
And more often than not are
represented side by side.
>> This bizarre holy union has
its origin in mythology where
the elephant-headed
man, against all logic,
rides upon the back of the rat.
Ganesh is everywhere.
On walls, near houses.
Great temples are
dedicated to him,
such as this one in Jaipur.
[BELLS RINGING]
This temple is so popular
because people consult Ganesh
about all sorts of things.
He is the god of
knowledge, but also
responsible for one's fortunes
in love, exams, or business.
[BELLS RINGING]
[CHANTING]
>> To gain Ganesh's favor,
the faithful bring gifts,
which the temple officials
symbolically offer to the god.
[CHANTING]
Ganesh is the object of quite a
remarkable level of veneration.
He's very close to
people's hearts,
a sort of multi-purpose
god, asked
to solve all manner
of everyday problems.
>> The symbolism is quite clear.
The animal half of
this hybrid deity
represents the
elephant's power to move
the heaviest of burdens.
With its size,
strength, and power,
the elephant could not
fail to make an impression
on men who were seeking
ways to interpret
their sacred universe.
On top of its
physical attributes,
the elephant is
considered to benefit
from innate wisdom, which is
seen as the greatest virtue.
[CHANTING]
>> In 13th century Thailand,
in the Sukhothai area,
the king had a Buddhist temple
built, known as Wat Chang Lom,
which means temple
surrounded by elephants.
The base of the
stupa is decorated
with 36 elephant images, a
demonstration of the reverence
that Buddhism has
for the elephant.
[CHANTING]
>> The elephant has played
an important part in the life
story of Buddha himself,
right from his birth.
Buddha is said to have been
born from immaculate conception.
His mother is supposed
to have been impregnated
by a white elephant in a dream.
The elephant also plays a
part in two other episodes
of Buddha's life.
One is represented
life size here.
This statue tells the tale of
how the elephant and the monkey
tended to Buddha as he
ended one of his long fasts.
The monkey is
offering him honey,
and the elephant is bringing
him water in a bamboo stem.
>> The elephant will always
remain linked to Buddha,
even after his death.
Every year at the end of July,
the town of Kandy in Sri Lanka
is taken over by elephants.
They come from the neighboring
villages with their masters
to take part in Esala Perehera.
It's an important
religious festival
which has been celebrated
for nearly 2,000 years
and honors the memory of Buddha.
>> When Buddha died
in the 6th century BC,
his body was cremated.
A princess is said to have
retrieved one of his teeth
from the funeral pyre,
hidden it in her hair,
and taken it back to Sri Lanka.
This dental relic has kept
it within the temple known
as Dalada Maligawa, literally
the temple of the tooth.
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]
Since the 18th century,
the precious molar
is paraded on the
back of an elephant
during the huge
Perehera celebrations.
[BELLS RINGING]
>> On the evening
of the big day,
the elephants congregate
on the esplanade in front
of the temple and are dressed
in their ceremonial clothes.
[CHANTING]
Within the temple itself, the
biggest and finest elephant
is being prepared.
This will be the one
which has the honor
of carrying the sacred tooth.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> The celebrations
last 10 days,
but they reached the peak of
their splendor on the night
of the full moon.
The elephant carrying
the holy palanquin
is surrounded by
priests and dignitaries,
over 1,000 dancers,
musicians, and jugglers,
and around 100 other elephants.
[FESTIVE MUSIC PLAYING]
This is one of the oldest
processions in the world
and is without doubt the last
where the animal, glorified
and accorded such great dignity,
is still so clearly associated
with the sacred.
[FESTIVE MUSIC PLAYING]
[SPIRITUAL MUSIC PLAYING]